---
layout: page
---

# A0: Implement ORDER BY

* Released: 9/8
* Due: 9/13 11:59PM EST
* Teams of **1**

UPDATES

* 9/12 clarified simplified ORDER BY semantics.  If you implemented PostgreSQL or SQLite semantics, we will accept those as well.

## Overview:

DataBass currently does not support orderby in SQL queries.  Your task will be to add Order by to Databass.
This involves updating the parser, the optimizer, and the iterator-based executor logic.  

The Order By clause is found after the HAVING clause, and prefixed with the key words "ORDER BY", followed by
a comma separated list of ordering terms.  Each term consists of an expression followed by an optional sorting
keyword (ASC/DESC).    

We will use the following simplified semantics:

* order by expressions may not define new aliases
* order by expressions may not reference output aliases
* order by a constant may be treated as a noop 
* databass does not support column indexing (e.g., 2 does not refer to the 2nd column)
* the query block's results are sorted by the first expression, and then the rows that are equal are then sorted by the second expression, and so on.
* databass does not support nulls 

If you implemented PostgreSQL or SQLite semantics, we will accept those as well.

<!-- Take a look at PostgreSQL or SQLite's documentation for a detailed specification of ORDER BY. -->

The goal of this homework is to get you familar with DataBass and muck around in parts of the codebase.
Take a look at the [README](../README.md) in this repo to get an overview of the system and how to set it up.
We have written a short description of the [system design](../design.md). 
Then read these instructions. If you get need any help, please reach us on slack.



## Tasks

Places where you need to add code are marked with a "A0" comment:

    ...
    # A0: implement me
    ...

We have included tests that you can run to sanity check your implementation.
These tests are not comprehensive, so you may wish to write your own tests as well.
The staff will evaluate your submissions with a more comprehensive suite of test cases.

#### Task 1: Add parser support

First, you will modify [`parse_sql.py`](../databass/parse_sql.py) and add the grammar rules 
so databass can parse ORDER BY statements.


Once the parser can generate an abstract syntax tree (AST) from a SQL string, you will then
update the visitor logic (`visit_orderby()`) to turn the AST nodes into query plan operators.
Specifically, each ordering term should be translated into a [`PSort`](../databass/parseops.py) object.

Test your code by running:

        pytest test/a0.py -k "test_parsing"

If your code crashes during the tests, you can ask pytest to drop you into the debugger:

        pytest test/a0.py -k "test_parsing" --pdb

Some other helpful pytest flags include:

* `-x`: to stop pytest the first time a test fails
* `--disable-pytest-warnings`: to supress the warning messages.

See the pytest documentation for more details.


#### Task 2: Plan Generation

The parsed query is represented as a [Parse Tree](../databass/parseops.py) that needs to translated into
a logical query plan.  You will add the logic to correctly add the OrderBy operator into the 
query plan.  See the comments in the code for details.

#### Task 3: Operator Implementation

Now that you can create a query plan, it's time to get it to run!  Modify the code in
[orderby.py](../databass/ops/orderby.py) to implement the ordering logic.

You can now test your code by running:

        pytest test/a0.py -k "test_end2end"

## Submission

1. Make sure your solution has been pushed to the appropriate branch
2. Make sure the staff have been added as collaborators to the repo
3. Fill out [this google form](https://forms.gle/47fRSDCrBu2gnD9D7)

